README.rst, before:

Creating Docker Containers Running Kofa
=======================================

With the given Dockerfile and script we can create a docker container
running `waeup.kofa` 1.5.

The following are merely notes to self.

Prepare Your Local Ubuntu
-------------------------

Install `docker`::

  $ sudo apt-get install docker.io

On Ubuntu "docker.io" is the official repo name of `docker`. This is
to distinguish from the same-named GUI app.


Install Basic Images (Ubuntu)
-----------------------------

You can pull a recent base image, we yet use Ubuntu, beforehand::

  $ docker pull ubuntu:14.04.5

This will fetch some hundred MBs. If you do not, the base image will
be fetched during build process.

You can play a bit with the freshly installed images.


Build Kofa
----------

This official docker image of `waeup.kofa` is based on Ubuntu
14.04.5. We have to get the Dockerfile and the `build.sh` script::

  $ git clone https://github.com/waeup/kofa-docker.git

This will put everything into a new local `kofa-docker` dir. Change to
it::

  $ cd kofa-docker/

Now start the build::

  $ docker build -t kofa .

This will take _lots_ of time, but should run until end.


Tag Container
-------------

Optionally, you might like to tag the built container::

  $ docker tag kofa:latest kofa:x.y.z

where ``x.y.z`` is a version number.


Run Kofa
--------

When finished, you can run your freshly installed `kofa` instance like
this::

  $ docker run --net=host -t -i kofa

After startup you should be able to reach the portal on your local
port 8080. Open

  http://localhost:8080/

in a browser (`grok`/`grok` as credentials).

Please note that changes you make will remain in the running single
container only. Persistent data can be saved with shared
folders/volumes as shown below.


Run Kofa (from Shell)
---------------------

Instead of starting a `kofa` instance immediately, you can also start
a shell and enter the container to do whatever you like there. In that
case you run a container with::

  $ docker run --net=host -t -i kofa /bin/bash

(note the trailing ``/bin/bash``) whch will drop you into a shell
inside the docker container. Change to `waeup.kofa` and start the
server manually::

  (container) $ ./bin/kofactl fg

After startup you should be able to reach the portal on your local
port 8080. Open

  http://localhost:8080/

If you stop the container shell (type 'exit'), the container will
still exist::

  $ docker ps --all
  CONTAINER ID     IMAGE            COMMAND                CREATED          STATUS                   PORTS            NAMES
  b74700439486     kofa:latest      "/bin/sh -c '/bin/ba   59 seconds ago   Exited (0) 23 seconds ago                 hopeful_ptolemy


To remove it, run::

  $ docker rm <container-name>

with the `<container-name>` listed before.

To see locally available images, run::

  $ docker images

An image can be removed with::

  $ docker rmi <image-id>

where `<image-id>` is a hex number as listed by the command
before.

You can also restart stopped containers and reattach to them::

  $ docker start <container-name>
  $ docker attach <container-name>

will bring you back into the container.


Run Kofa - w/o Entering the Container
-------------------------------------

Of course you can run `kofa` without entering the container and doing
complex things at all::

  $ docker run --net=host -d kofa

will give you access to a running `kofa` instance on your localhost
port ``8080``. The default credentials are ``grok`` / ``grok``.

You can make sure everything worked wit `docker ps`::

  $ docker ps -l
  CONTAINER ID        IMAGE        COMMAND                CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES
  9033a6bd4baf        kofa         "/home/kofa/waeup.ko   4 minutes ago       Up 4 minutes                            loving_franklin

A running docker instance can be stopped with::

  $ docker stop loving_franklin
  loving_franklin

and be restarted with::

  $ docker start loving_franklin
  loving_franklin

and `kofa` should be accessible at ``http://localhost:8080/`` again.

You can follow logs printed to stdout with::

  $ docker logs loving_franklin
  /home/kofa/waeup.kofa/bin/paster serve /home/kofa/waeup.kofa/parts/etc/themed-deploy.ini
  2016-07-02 09:15:49,013 INFO [zope.app.generations] main db: evolving in mode EVOLVEMINIMUM
  2016-07-02 09:15:49,018 INFO [zope.app.generations] main db/zope.app: running install generation

but it makes more sense to create a shared folder where you can store
persistent data, including several logs and data files.

To remove a container completely, use ``docker rm`` as shown above.


Kofa Data Persistence
---------------------

Data in Kofa is stored in a database called `ZODB`. This database is a
simple file in the ``var/`` folder of the Kofa instance installed.

If you do changes and the database is not persisted, all changes will
be lost on restart.

To make your changes last, you must make the ``var/`` folder
persistent. You can do so for instance by::

  $ docker run --net=host -t -v `pwd`/data:/home/kofa/waeup.kofa/var -i kofa

Here, with the ``-v`` option, we use a shared volume. A folder on host
(called ``data``) is mapped to the ``var/`` folder in the container.

Please note that *in the container* you have to run

  (container) $ ./bin/buildout

to populate the folder if it is not already.



Building on Other Base Images
-----------------------------

By default we support Ubuntu 14.04 as base. Apart from that we provide
limited support for other images::

  xenial/    # Ubuntu 16.04

You can build/tag/run respective images like this::

  $ docker build -t kofa:xenial xenial/
  $ docker tag kofa:latest kofa:xenial-x.y.z
  $ docker run --net=host -t -i kofa:xenial

Other commands for handling non-default images apply as shown above.

Commit message:

Tell about `--no-cache` when building images.

README.rst, after:

Creating Docker Containers Running Kofa
=======================================

With the given Dockerfile and script we can create a docker container
running `waeup.kofa` 1.5.

The following are merely notes to self.

Prepare Your Local Ubuntu
-------------------------

Install `docker`::

  $ sudo apt-get install docker.io

On Ubuntu "docker.io" is the official repo name of `docker`. This is
to distinguish from the same-named GUI app.


Install Basic Images (Ubuntu)
-----------------------------

You can pull a recent base image, we yet use Ubuntu, beforehand::

  $ docker pull ubuntu:14.04.5

This will fetch some hundred MBs. If you do not, the base image will
be fetched during build process.

You can play a bit with the freshly installed images.


Build Kofa
----------

This official docker image of `waeup.kofa` is based on Ubuntu
14.04.5. We have to get the Dockerfile and the `build.sh` script::

  $ git clone https://github.com/waeup/kofa-docker.git

This will put everything into a new local `kofa-docker` dir. Change to
it::

  $ cd kofa-docker/

Now start the build::

  $ docker build -t kofa .

This will take _lots_ of time, but should run until end.
Use ``--no-cache`` to build from scratch, even if parts of the image
where built successfully already.


Tag Container
-------------

Optionally, you might like to tag the built container::

  $ docker tag kofa:latest kofa:x.y.z

where ``x.y.z`` is a version number.


Run Kofa
--------

When finished, you can run your freshly installed `kofa` instance like
this::

  $ docker run --net=host -t -i kofa

After startup you should be able to reach the portal on your local
port 8080. Open

  http://localhost:8080/

in a browser (`grok`/`grok` as credentials).

Please note that changes you make will remain in the running single
container only. Persistent data can be saved with shared
folders/volumes as shown below.


Run Kofa (from Shell)
---------------------

Instead of starting a `kofa` instance immediately, you can also start
a shell and enter the container to do whatever you like there. In that
case you run a container with::

  $ docker run --net=host -t -i kofa /bin/bash

(note the trailing ``/bin/bash``) whch will drop you into a shell
inside the docker container. Change to `waeup.kofa` and start the
server manually::

  (container) $ ./bin/kofactl fg

After startup you should be able to reach the portal on your local
port 8080. Open

  http://localhost:8080/

If you stop the container shell (type 'exit'), the container will
still exist::

  $ docker ps --all
  CONTAINER ID     IMAGE            COMMAND                CREATED          STATUS                   PORTS            NAMES
  b74700439486     kofa:latest      "/bin/sh -c '/bin/ba   59 seconds ago   Exited (0) 23 seconds ago                 hopeful_ptolemy


To remove it, run::

  $ docker rm <container-name>

with the `<container-name>` listed before.

To see locally available images, run::

  $ docker images

An image can be removed with::

  $ docker rmi <image-id>

where `<image-id>` is a hex number as listed by the command
before.

You can also restart stopped containers and reattach to them::

  $ docker start <container-name>
  $ docker attach <container-name>

will bring you back into the container.


Run Kofa - w/o Entering the Container
-------------------------------------

Of course you can run `kofa` without entering the container and doing
complex things at all::

  $ docker run --net=host -d kofa

will give you access to a running `kofa` instance on your localhost
port ``8080``. The default credentials are ``grok`` / ``grok``.

You can make sure everything worked wit `docker ps`::

  $ docker ps -l
  CONTAINER ID        IMAGE        COMMAND                CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES
  9033a6bd4baf        kofa         "/home/kofa/waeup.ko   4 minutes ago       Up 4 minutes                            loving_franklin

A running docker instance can be stopped with::

  $ docker stop loving_franklin
  loving_franklin

and be restarted with::

  $ docker start loving_franklin
  loving_franklin

and `kofa` should be accessible at ``http://localhost:8080/`` again.

You can follow logs printed to stdout with::

  $ docker logs loving_franklin
  /home/kofa/waeup.kofa/bin/paster serve /home/kofa/waeup.kofa/parts/etc/themed-deploy.ini
  2016-07-02 09:15:49,013 INFO [zope.app.generations] main db: evolving in mode EVOLVEMINIMUM
  2016-07-02 09:15:49,018 INFO [zope.app.generations] main db/zope.app: running install generation

but it makes more sense to create a shared folder where you can store
persistent data, including several logs and data files.

To remove a container completely, use ``docker rm`` as shown above.


Kofa Data Persistence
---------------------

Data in Kofa is stored in a database called `ZODB`. This database is a
simple file in the ``var/`` folder of the Kofa instance installed.

If you do changes and the database is not persisted, all changes will
be lost on restart.

To make your changes last, you must make the ``var/`` folder
persistent. You can do so for instance by::

  $ docker run --net=host -t -v `pwd`/data:/home/kofa/waeup.kofa/var -i kofa

Here, with the ``-v`` option, we use a shared volume. A folder on host
(called ``data``) is mapped to the ``var/`` folder in the container.

Please note that *in the container* you have to run

  (container) $ ./bin/buildout

to populate the folder if it is not already.



Building on Other Base Images
-----------------------------

By default we support Ubuntu 14.04 as base. Apart from that we provide
limited support for other images::

  xenial/    # Ubuntu 16.04

You can build/tag/run respective images like this::

  $ docker build -t kofa:xenial xenial/
  $ docker tag kofa:latest kofa:xenial-x.y.z
  $ docker run --net=host -t -i kofa:xenial

Other commands for handling non-default images apply as shown above.
